Enschede has experienced several major disasters. In 1517, the city was almost completely destroyed by a fire. Only the two city gates and the church, which were made of stone, remained. The second city fire followed in 1750, and in 1862, the city burned down for the third time, almost entirely. This is why Enschede has very few buildings older than 1862. A more recent disaster was the fireworks disaster in the year 2000. The explosion of a fireworks company’s storage killed 23 people, including 4 firefighters, and injured 950 people. The material damage was enormous: 200 homes were destroyed, 1500 homes were damaged, and 500 businesses also suffered damage. It was the largest explosion in the Netherlands since the Second World War.
One of the models, with the darker areas, shows the situation before the fireworks disaster. At number 6 on the model was the bunker with the fireworks storage. Everything that is dark in colour was destroyed in the explosion. Close to the fireworks storage, you can see a huge factory, the building with monitor roof. That was the Bamshoeve, a former textile spinning mill, intended to house a museum there, the precursor to De Museumfabriek. The Bamshoeve however, was completely destroyed.
You are now on the former premises of the “Rozendaal” factory. This factory was already in very poor condition before the disaster, and it was intended to be demolished. Because the windows and doors were missing, the shockwave could pass through the building without causing much damage. After the disaster, it was decided to restore this building – number 1 on the model – and turn it into a museum.
The other model was used in the rebuilding plans for the neighbourhood. Not everything, but much of what is shown on that model was realised. Part of the neighbourhood was rebuilt with the same street layout and the same houses, but most of the neighbourhood was redesigned.
The next listening point is near the glass house in the next space, directly on your lefthand side. 
