In front of you is a xylotheque, also known as a wood library. Each part looks like a book, but appearances are deceptive. Each part is about a single tree species. On the spine of the 'book' is the tree's bark. Inside, you will find a description of the tree, a dried leaf, a piece of the roots, and the tree's fruits. There is also a small block of wood inside. This allows you to see how heavy the wood is. And there is a small jar with ash from the tree. This shows you how much energy the tree produces when burned. This is known as the 'calorific value'.
Xylotheques were especially owned by kings and wealthy people. They were often kept in their Wunderkammer, or in English, a 'cabinet of curiosities'. This was a room filled with special items from nature, meant to show off one’s collection.
Around 1800, there were several universities in the Netherlands. The University of Harderwijk was one of them. Napoleon Bonaparte’s brother, Louis Napoleon became king of the Netherlands at that time. He wanted to close the University of Harderwijk. The people from the university gave him an important title, hoping he would keep the university open. And he did! He even ordered beautiful xylotheques for three universities, including the one in Harderwijk. It took a while for the xylotheques to be completed. But by the time the xylotheque arrived in Harderwijk, Napoleon Bonaparte had already deposed his brother and closed the university. The xylotheque was put away in the attic and was only rediscovered in the 1950s.
This xylotheque is characteristic for the time we now call the Age of Enlightenment. Just before the French era in the Netherlands (1795-1813), Linnaeus created a system to give names to all plants and animals and had studied at the University of Harderwijk! At that time, the first encyclopaedias were also being created. It’s still unclear whether this xylotheque was truly useful for the university. It seems more like study material for forestry.
Walk back a bit. Under the red bridge, you will see two large models. The next listening point is there.
