You now find yourself next to the machines that are used to turn cotton fibres into yarn.
Around 1830, the region already had an industry focused on weaving. Yarn was ordered from England, as mechanical spinning was not yet possible here. In 1830, the first steam-powered spinning mill was opened in Almelo. Enschede followed in 1833 with the steam spinning mill "The Great Steam", initiated by several textile manufacturers from the region. By spinning their own yarn, they could now directly order raw cotton. This was sometimes sourced from Asia, but most of the cotton came from the southern United States.
The process starts with the machine closest to the door leading outside. This is a bale breaker. In the United States, cotton was pressed into large bales, and here, the bales were pulled apart. You can see what such a cotton bale looks like in the large glass display case, all the way to the left at the top. You can also see a revolver there. When workers at Van Heek & Co. opened a cotton bale around 1914, they found this revolver. Somehow, it had ended up in the bale press in the United States.
In the first three machines, the cotton flocks were loosened, and waste bits like cottonseed, twigs, and other impurities were removed. The machine with the large drum covered with many projecting wired or metal teeth is the carding machine.  This machine breaks up knots, removes short fibres, aligns the cotton fibres in one direction, and forms a light mat of cotton that eventually gathers into a sliver. This is then placed in a red sliver can, or spinning can, which feeds the next machine: the draw frame. Here, multiple slivers (six or eight, for example) are fed into the machine in parallel, then drawn out to form a single sliver. This stretching occurs because the output rollers spin faster than the input rollers. The purpose of this machine is to improve consistency by eliminating thick and thin spots. Typically, the cotton passes through the draw frame twice.
Spinning fine yarn is now done in two steps: first on the roving frame and then on the ring spinning frame. The sliver cans are brought to the roving frame, where the individual slivers are stretched again and wound onto a bobbin. This produces a thick thread, called roving, with minimal twist. The final machine, located just in front of the glass enclosure, is the ring spinning frame. Here, the yarn from the bobbin is drawn out again and twisted, creating the final yarn.
Sometimes, extra steps – known as combing – are added to remove shorter fibres. This results in higher quality yarn made from only the longest fibres, known as combed yarn.
For the next listening point, you need to walk towards the two large looms, which are positioned against the slanted wall. These are Jacquard looms.
