The farmhouse you’re in now, has been reconstructed with original materials. It has been furnished as it might have looked between 1850 and 1900. In Twente, they call this a ‘los hoes’. ‘Los’ in Twente means ‘open’. There are no walls separating the living space from the stables. Instead of opening windows and doors as they do in the rest of the Netherlands, people in Twente leave them ‘loose’.
In this region, many farmers supplemented their income by spinning and weaving. Flax was grown on the land. Linen yarn was made from flax. Many farmhouses had a loom where linen was woven. Traders, the predecessors of textile manufacturers, collected the woven linen to sell elsewhere.
The loom here has a boat shuttle or in the dialect of this area a ‘smietspoel’. A hollow shuttle contained a spool of yarn. One hand would throw the shuttle through the threads, and the other would catch it. It took a lot of strength and skill! When this became automatic later, the ‘smietspoel’ became a ‘schietspoel’ or flying shuttle. You can see these shuttles on the looms elsewhere in the museum.
On the shelf, just below the loft, are the tools needed to turn flax into yarn. After the flax has been harvested, it was laid on the land to ‘ret’. Yes, actually ‘rot’! The outer layer of the flax stem softened during retting, making it easier to remove. After the retting process, the flax stems went into the ‘flax brake’, which broke the outer layer into small pieces. Next to the flax breaker is a scutching board. On this board the last bits of the outer layer were struck off with a wooden or metal scutch knife. The fibres of the inside of the flax stem were left behind. These were then processed on the hackle to remove impurities and align the long fibres (line flax) while separating shorter fibres (tow flax)
The next step in the process was the spinning wheel. With the spinning wheel, the flax fibres were spun into yarn. This yarn was wound onto a large spool. With the spinning wheel, the yarn was wound onto small spools. These small spools were used in the smietspoel.
The next listening point is in the next room. Turn left, past the plane. There you’ll see two altar stones.
