The history of Twente has been linked to textiles for centuries. Before the industrial revolution, starting in the mid-19th century, textiles were not produced in large factories. Farmers made them at home during the winter months when there was little work to do on the land. The women spun the flax harvested in the summer into yarn, and the farmer wove it into fabric on a loom. This coarse type of cloth was called linen.  
The linen that the farmers didn’t use themselves was sold to travelling merchants, who resold it at a profit, of course! These merchants became increasingly important. They often had the fabrics they purchased from farmers processed further—for example, bleached or dyed—to increase their value. They also provided farmers with yarn to work with, buying it back later and paying the farmers for their labour. These merchants were often called "linen traders" or "reeders," derived from the Dutch words for "preparer" or "finisher," because they prepared the yarn for weaving. They were also frequently referred to as entrepreneurs."  
One of these travelling entrepreneurs was Hendrik ten Kate. In 1819, he married Henriette Walkate. On the right-hand side of the wall, you can see a portrait of their family, painting number 8. It was created when the first four of their nine children had been born. Life as an industrialist wasn’t always easy in the beginning, as Hendrik described in a letter to his wife in 1824:  
*"I was ferried from Veere to Beveland. The road was so slippery and difficult to traverse that I decided to hire a carriage. It was only a three-hour walk, but the ride cost four guilders and ten cents! My feet were sore, and I had blisters. I couldn’t go further than Kolijnsplaat that day—a three-hour walk. So, I took the carriage after all. At 7 p.m., I arrived in Kolijnsplaat, where I spent the night. I had gotten rather wet, so I bought new socks. At 10 p.m., I went to bed and arranged to be woken at 2:30 a.m. I then left for Bruinisse, travelled from there to Herkingen, and then on to Dirksland, Sommelsdijk, and Middelharnis before arriving in Den Briel at 8 p.m. It was such a long day, and the heat made me very tired. You can imagine I enjoyed a good night sleep! The next morning, I explored Den Briel and then travelled to Maassluis, followed by Delft, and then Leiden. From Leiden, I took the night barge to Amsterdam."*  
At the end of the 18th century, Twente began spinning cotton. This was done in spinning rooms in town using hand-operated machines with eight spindles called Spinning Jennies, which were modelled after English machines. After the Belgian Revolution in 1830, attempts were made in Twente to spin cotton yarn with steam-powered machines. The first efforts failed, but by 1836, with Dixon’s help, coarse weft yarn was successfully spun. However, English yarn ultimately proved cheaper and produced better handwoven textiles for export to the Dutch colony of the East Indies, now Indonesia.  
By 1855, industrial weaving finally began, and hand weaving by farmers had disappeared by around 1875.  
A key pioneer of the textile industry was Herman van Lochem. His portrait hangs on the far right of the painting wall, painting number 14. During a trip to Germany to purchase yarn, he learned the technique of weaving fustian which was called in the Netherlands bombazijn. Bombazijn is a fabric with a linen warp and a coarse cotton weft, with the weft sitting on top due to its special weave. It was a sturdy, durable fabric used for work and undergarments. In 1728, he and eight other entrepreneurs, along with the mayor, obtained permission from the province to weave bombazijn in Enschede. Van Lochem passed away in 1782 as the wealthiest entrepreneur in Twente, with a fortune exceeding 100,000 guilders! By comparison, another entrepreneur Hendrik ten Kate in Almelo had only 5,500 guilders in business capital at that time.  
The name Herman van Lochem lives on in a street and a park in Enschede. However, few images of him are known. Further along this wall, you’ll find two more. The three portraits are very similar. This first painting is the original, passed down from his great-great-grandson Lambertus ten Cate. The other two are copies, one of which was painted by his great-great-great-granddaughter, Bertha Jordaan-van Heek.  
